debezium/dbz#1843 - Enable DB2 Support for Change Table Prune - Docum… (#7440)
debezium/debezium: documentation/modules/ROOT/pages/connectors/db2.adoc

.Additional resources
* For more information about capture agent parameters, see the Db2 documentation.

> === Db2 Change Table Pruning

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Type: concept
// ModuleID: understanding-how-db2-change-table-pruning-works-in-a-debezium-environment
// Title: Understanding how Db2 change table pruning works in a {prodname} environment
[id="db2-change-table-pruning"]
=== Db2 Change Table Pruning
```

> As the capture agent functions by creating sql records that represent changes in the captured tables and Debezium produces
> these as Kafka events, it is necessary to have a pruning process of the change capture tables.  In default deployments, this
> is controlled by the DB2 *Apply* agent (responsible for reading the change tables and representing them elsewhere, like Debezium),
> updating a set of prune tables that notify the *Capture* agent that the records have been reflected to the target system(s)
> and the data can be removed from the change tables, otherwise they will grow and become unmanagable or exhaust resourced.
> 
> If the *Apply* agent is not needed as Debezium is handling that role, a use case that solutions often encounter, the *Apply* agent
> can be stopped - it need not use resources, but the *prune* function must be fulfilled in its absence, and the database must be
> configured such that the prune thread is able to use the tables that communicate what can be pruned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Change data tables grow continuously unless processed records are removed.
Review how pruning works and how to ensure that pruning continues in a {prodname} environment.

The IBM Db2 capture agent (ASNCDC) creates SQL records in change data (CD) tables to represent changes that occur in monitored source tables. 
Typically, for each source table that {prodname} captures, the capture agent creates a corresponding CD table.
{prodname} captures event records from CD tables and emits corresponding change event messages that represent them to Apache Kafka topics.
After {prodname} processes a record from the CD table, the record is no longer needed, but Db2 does not automatically delete the processed rows. 
Without intervention, the CD tables continuously accumulate records until they consume all available disk space.
To prevent uncontrolled table growth, reduces storage requirements, and helps maintain replication and database performance, it's important to implement a pruning process. 

In deployments where {prodname} does not consume change event records, pruning is controlled by the DB2 Apply agent, which reads the change tables and replicates data to a set of prune tables at the configured destination. 
After the Apply agent updates the target prune tables it notifies the *Capture* agent that the records have been successfully replicated, and the data can be removed from the change tables.

In a {prodname} environment, because the *Apply* agent is not required to read the CD tables, users sometimes stop the agent to conserve processing resources.
Stopping the agent also stops the associated *prune* function, which can lead to unwanted CD table growth.
To avoid this situation, you must configure Db2 so that the prune thread is able to identify the records that need pruning.
```

> This is a summary of what needs to be in place for the prune to work in this way.  Please review the IBM documentation
> regarding the IBMSNAP control tables as official documentation for the version in use.
> 
> DB2 tables - The table must exist on the IBMSNAP_REGISTER table, with its change tables properly defined and a non-null
> CD_SYNCHPOINT_OLD column.  It also needs to be present on the IBMSNAP_PRUNCNTL table, with the exact same values for the table,
> schema, with the change capture tables as well and a unique MAP_ID.  Finally, it must be present on the IBMSNAP_PRUNE_SET,
> with matching values for the APPLY_QUAL, SET_NAME, and a unique TARGET_SERVER value.  If all of these are in place, the prune
> thread will run on an interval defined by IBMSNAP_CAPPARAMS's PRUNE_INTERVAL in seconds.  If there are addititional records
> on the IBMSNAP_PRUNE_SET table for the same APPLY_QUAL and SET_NAME, but with a different TARGET_SERVER, the prune will not
> be effective, as the Capture agent will not prune the change table unless all TARGET_SERVER values have advanced in their
> SYNCHPOINT such that the older records may be removed.
> [NOTE]
> ====
> Specific guidance about how to configure Db2 capture agent parameters is beyond the scope of this documentation.
> ====

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Type: procedure
[id="enable-the-db2-capture-agent-to-prune-obsolete-cd-tables"]
=== Enable the Db2 capture agent to prune obsolete change data tables

Specific control table settings are required to enable pruning in {prodname} Db2 connector deployments.
Verify the control table configuration that the pruning process requires.

For more information about the `IBMSNAP_*` control tables and their use in your environment, see thehttps://www.ibm.com/docs/en/idr/11.4.0?topic=structures-tables-capture-control-server[IBM Db2 documentation].
 
.Procedure
 
. Verify the `IBMSNAP_REGISTER` configuration.
+
Confirm that the following conditions are met:
+
* The source table is registered in the `IBMSNAP_REGISTER` control table.
* The change data tables are correctly defined.
* The `CD_SYNCHPOINT_OLD` column contains a non-null value.
 
. Verify the `IBMSNAP_PRUNCNTL` configuration.
+
Confirm that the following conditions are met:
+
* The source table is registered in the `IBMSNAP_PRUNCNTL` control table.
* The table name and schema name match the corresponding values in `IBMSNAP_REGISTER`.
* The associated change data tables are correctly specified.
* The `MAP_ID` value is unique.
 
. Verify the `IBMSNAP_PRUNE_SET` configuration.
+
Confirm that the following conditions are met:
+
* The source table is registered in the `IBMSNAP_PRUNE_SET` control table.
* The `APPLY_QUAL` value matches the corresponding value in the other control tables.
* The `SET_NAME` value matches the corresponding value in the other control tables.
* The `TARGET_SERVER` value is unique.
+
[IMPORTANT]
====
If the `IBMSNAP_PRUNE_SET` table contains multiple rows that use the same `APPLY_QUAL` and `SET_NAME` values, the capture agent does not prune change data until the synchronization point for every associated `TARGET_SERVER` advances beyond the records that are eligible for removal.
====
 
. Verify the `IBMSNAP_CAPPARMS` configuration.
+
Confirm that the following condition is met:
+
* The `PRUNE_INTERVAL` value specifies the interval, in seconds, at which the Db2 capture agent runs the prune process.
 
[NOTE]
====
Configuration of Db2 capture agent parameters is beyond the scope of this documentation.
====

```

Used to limit the size of queries when the change table is large to avoid excessive resource usage, sometimes resulting in query cancellation.
If 0, no timespan limit will apply.
One second is not allowed as this can result in an infinite loop.  Recommended non-zero default is 120 seconds.

|[[db2-property-update-capture-table-prune-ind]]<<db2-property-update-capture-table-prune-ind, `update.capture.table.prune.ind`>>
|false (disabled)
|A switch to control if the connector instance is responsible for updating the prune table (usually
done by IBM DB2 Apply agent) which will cause the IBM Capture agent to prune read data from the change tables.

> If true, related configuration must be specified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Specifies whether the connector updates the prune table.
The IBM DB2 Apply agent typically performs this task.

When you enable this property (set the value to `true`), after the connector reads a record in the change data table, it updates the prune table, enabling the IBM Capture agent to prune the related record from the change table.
To use this property you must also configure the related `update.capture.table.prune` properties.
```

|[[db2-property-update-capture-table-prune-set-name]]<<db2-property-update-capture-table-prune-set-name, update.capture.table.prune.set.name>>
| No default

> | If set to update the prune table, this will identify the prune set name that should be used when updating the table for this instance. The if prune update is enabled, the set name must be set to a non-empty string. The if prune update is disabled, the set name may not be set to a value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Specifies the prune set name that the connector uses when it updates the prune table for this instance.
 This setting only applies if you enable `update.capture.table.prune.ind` so that the connector updates the prune table.
 Specify a prune set name to any non-empty string. 
 If `update.capture.table.prune.ind` is disabled, do not specify a prune set name for this property.
```

|[[db2-property-update-capture-table-prune-min-interval]]<<db2-property-update-capture-table-prune-min-interval, update.capture.table.prune.min.interval.ms>>

> |10000

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|10000 (10 seconds)
```

> | The minimum number of milliseconds between the connector instance's update of the prune point for the prune set. Default is 10000 (10 seconds).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Specifies the minimum interval, in milliseconds, that the connector instance allows between updates to the prune point for the prune set.
```

|[[db2-property-update-capture-table-prune-lsn-decrement]]<<db2-property-update-capture-table-prune-lsn-decrement, update.capture.table.prune.lsn.decrement>>
|true (enabled)

> | A switch to decrement the prune lsn/syncpoint by one to avoid allowing the last lsn processed to get pruned to avoid the risk of an unnecessary snapshot due to the last processed lsn not being present in the change table.  Only applies if prune indicator is set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Specifies whether the connector decrements the prune LSN/syncpoint by one before updating the prune table.

When enabled, the connector preserves the last processed LSN in the change tables. 
Preserving this record helps prevent unnecessary snapshots that might occur if the last processed LSN is no longer present in the change table.

This setting applies only when `update.capture.table.prune.ind` is enabled.
```

|[[db2-property-update-capture-table-prune-apply-qual]]<<db2-property-update-capture-table-prune-apply-qual, update.capture.table.prune.apply.qual>>
| No default

> | The apply_qual name that represents the apply agent (this instance) to the prune set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Specifies the Apply qualifier (`APPLY_QUAL`) that the connector uses when updating the prune table.

The value identifies the connector instance as a consumer of change-table data and enables the IBM Capture agent to track the connector's progress for pruning.

When {prodname} reads the change tables and streams records from them to Kafka, it acts as an Apply Agent. 
However, as an external system, {prodname} is unknown to the internal Db2 cleanup system.
The unique name that you specify represents {prodname} to Db2 so that it correctly identifies the connector instance when it processes a change event record.
By assigning this `apply-qual` name, you enable the database to track which read operations correspond to the specific connector instance, helping to prevent the database from deleting data before the instance can read it.

This setting applies only when `update.capture.table.prune.ind` is enabled.
```

|[[db2-property-update-capture-table-prune-target-server]]<<db2-property-update-capture-table-prune-target-server, update.capture.table.prune.target.server>>
| No default

> | The target_server name that represents the apply agent's target (where the data is going) for the subscription set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Specifies the name of the target server for the subscription set.

The value identifies the destination database associated with the connector's Apply-agent identity.
This setting applies only when `update.capture.table.prune.ind` is enabled.
```

|[[db2-property-update-capture-table-prune-procedure-override-name]]<<db2-property-update-capture-table-prune-procedure-override-name, update.capture.table.prune.procedure.override.name>>
| No default

> | The name of a prepared statement in the database that will be used instead of direct SQL update to allow for DBA control of the update code where needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Specifies the name of the prepared statement that the connector uses instead of issuing direct SQL update statements.
 
Use this property when database administrators require control over the update implementation.

This setting applies only when `update.capture.table.prune.ind` is enabled.
```
Does the prepared statement in the description refer to a stored procedure?
